5G marks yet another wireless technology
transition one part of the transition
promised immense bandwidth and super
fast speeds millimeter Wave It's a
fascinating technology but a few years
into the 5G roll out difficult Technical
and economic challenges remain if
semiconductors are black magic then
radio frequency integrated circuits or
rfic are the darkest of the dark arts
let us take our first defense against
the dark art class no cursing allowed in
this video we dip our toes into rfic and
the 5G millimet wave
deployment imagine a wave traveling
through open space the distance that
wave travels in a single cycle is called
the wavelength and is measured in meters
how many cycles pass through a given
point is the frequency and it is
measured in hertz named after the
American car rental company based in
Florida not really don't leave a comment
about that
a megahertz means a million Cycles
passing in a second gigahertz a billion
Tera a trillion frequency and wavelength
are inversely related so as frequencies
rise the wavelengths fall some of the
highest frequency waves are Unholy
things like gamma rays their wavelengths
are measured in the picometers and they
have so much energy we use them to kill
cancer
cells countries allocate parts of their
Spectrum to certain use cases like radar
or Wireless or Wi-Fi spectrum is
fundamentally limited so making the most
of what you have is a
challenge the last big Wireless
generation was 4G and in that generation
the world's telecoms converged on the
LTE standard due to its Superior data
down link speeds but being a world
standard LTE had to accommodate many
different frequency slices anywhere from
the 450 megaherz to the 3.6 GHz
neighborhood this made developing an LTE
World phone
exceptionally difficult but a larger
issue concerned the capacity constraints
when you only use these small slices of
frequency the 1G through 4G systems have
always used frequency bands below 7.125
GHz but over the years those
neighborhoods had gotten very crowded
and typically a cell operator in a
particular geography has only around 200
MHz of spectrum to work with and that is
not enough so in that context Engineers
began pondering the philosophical
foundations of 5G what should 5G try to
be yes 5G wireless networks must be able
to handle yet more data traffic mostly
mobile video it seems and the section of
the 5G standard is called enhanced
mobile broadband but its creators also
Envision 5G enabling other types of
communication one is an ultra reliable
low latency networking or URL LC Ur LLC
is for handling super important data
that must be delivered quickly and
reliably imagine self-driving cars
communicating with each other to avoid
collisions or robot arm being wirelessly
controlled both cases we need to deliver
signals in like less than 100
milliseconds the other use case is
massive machine type Communications
meant for lots of lowcost machines that
transmit data infrequently but for a
long time think sensors actuators
vending machines and the like these
three cases involve different
requirements for example streaming video
on your phone does not require the same
latency or reliability as autonomous
cars exchanging data to determine how to
avoid a collision because these
philosophical goals for the 5G standard
are so broad 5G was thusly designed to
be more flexible particularly in what
frequency bands it can use and for the
first time 5G opens up a whole new slice
of the Spectrum for us in 2011 dorier
Pai and faruko Khan from Samsung
Electronics wrote an influential article
in the i e Communications magazine p and
KH looked at all the tricks that LTE had
to do to get the most out of the limited
spectrum and concluded that something
else was necessary so P con suggested
entering the then largely unexplored
millimeter wave regions pointing to
several millimeter wave bands in the 7
70 80 90 GHz range these are called
millimeter wave bands because their
wavelengths are in the 1 to 10 mm range
the FCC opened them up in 2003 for New
Economic Development before that the
Spectrum was only used for military
Radars satellite Communications or
cellular backhole basically
point-to-point connections were a big
fix antenna fires narrow millimet wave
beams and another big fixed antenna
several kilm
away the beam tolerances are such that
strong winds can sway the towers and
misalign the beams so you can guess why
millimeter wave has not been much used
for Consumer
Wireless probably the first consumer use
case after the FCC decision was
Automotive radar the 77 GHz Spectrum ban
was opened up to help the Advanced
Driver assistance systems and cars
identify dangerous situations and
prevent
crashes another use case was the the Y
gig Wi-Fi standard which uses a 60 GHz
band first formed in 2009 I can't really
say that it has caught on but soon after
Samsung's paper the idea gained traction
and in 2014 published research at both
NYU and UT Austin showed it technically
feasible to bring millimeter wave to
Consumer Wireless
applications so in the end 5G gained
support for a set of bands in the range
from
24.25 to 52. 6 GHz this is in addition
to two other sets of bands located in
more traditional sub7 GHz
neighborhoods here we should take a
pause and talk about rfic and how they
work your slick sexy iPhone 16 and your
grandpa's two-way radio might seem light
years apart but at the end of it they're
both radio transceivers a transceiver
being combo devices that work as both
transmitter and receiver let us
sequentially step through how they work
and bear with me there's going to be a
lot of terminology but these big words
convey relatively simple ideas imagine a
phone and it wants to send a message
first the phone's processor sends text
data to the transceiver in the form of
bits ones and zeros the rfic Begins by
converting those digital bits into a
continuous analog signal the analog
signal you get as a result is called the
baseband just an analog encoding of your
Digital Data
great we can transmit the signal now
right no the problem is that the base
band is low frequency and that will
cause problems with the antenna the rule
of thumb is that the antenna should be
about half the wavelength a low
frequency like with the baseband means a
big wavelength and thus an impractically
large antenna for a phone so we and by
we I mean the rfic not literally us
employ a mixer to mix the baseband
signal with a higher frequency signal
called the carrier frequency this Unholy
ritual is known as up conversion and it
transmogrifies the base band signal into
a pass band
signal the cell operator chooses the
carrier frequency based on what was
allotted to them by the regulator as
well as what is supported by the
wireless technology standard when we
create the pass band signal we also
create a small band of frequencies
higher and or lower than the carrier
frequency these are called side bands
and this is where the actual data from
the base band is encoded the whole slice
of frequency from the lowest to highest
sideband is called the bandwidth the
size of the side bands is defined as a
percentage and that explains why a
higher carrier frequency like that of
the millimeter wave get you more
bandwidth 10% of 25 GHz is way higher
than 10% of 7 GHz and that means more
data
capacity now the pass band signal is
more suitable to send but not quite yet
your iPhone needs to communicate with
the cell tower but the nearest
traditional Tower is usually about 2 km
away from and 30 to 100 m above the
iPhone and it needs to reach that
imagine a wave traveling or propagating
through plain air outwards from the
phone you might imagine it as like a
sperical wave moving outwards from the
mobile device kind of like a force field
or some bubble in a Sci-Fi movie The for
formal name for this expanding bubble
behavior is isotropic radiator in the
real world a perfect isotropic radiator
like a perfect marriage on Instagram
does not exist at distance at certain
areas the bubble will flatten out but I
think it is helpful to visualize it like
as such anyway so we have this bubble
expanding outwardly from the mobile
device in every direction the mobile
phone use some amount of power to Output
that bubble and that power is spread out
across the bubbles quotequote surface
area so as the bubble travels outwards
its surface area expands diluting the
wave's power density this dilution is
known as path loss and it is measured
using the free equation path loss in
turn leads to attenuation which in the
Wireless World refers to the gradual
reduction of signal strength not all
attenuation is due to path loss rain
object obstruction and the like are
other reasons the path loss is indeed a
significant contributor to
attenuation thanks to this path loss and
other attenuating causing factors if we
want the P band signal to reach the
tower then we must amplify its power
this is the job of the power
amplifier the power amplifier is the
rfc's most power hungry module it is
also one of the most difficult modules
to design designers must design a power
amplifier that can achieve the highest
level of output power to reach the tower
while also maintaining good efficiency
and linearity a wireless device is a
power constrained environment plus
pulling power also generates heat so we
want to be as efficient as possible we
can measure this with a metric called
drain efficiency if the amplifier draws
2 watts of power from the battery and
outputs one watt then it has 50% drain
efficiency another thing that power
amplifier designers have to consider is
something called linearity linearity
describes this signals quality as it
travels through the
amplifier finally After exiting the
power amplifier the boosted passband
signal is transferred to the antennas
antennas we finally at antennas so we're
done right we transmit right no man that
would be too easy I have one more thing
to add if you were paying attention to
the section about path loss then you
might have been wondering per the free
equation the path loss is proportional
to the wavelength squared so higher
frequency waves travel less well than
lower frequency ones right if we go from
3 GHz to 30 GHz Spectrum the path loss
gets to be 100 times worse and we would
need immense power to send any signal
right luckily this is only the case with
a pair of identically sized antennas but
since the wavelengths are smaller with
millimeter wave we can also make the
antenna smaller they also have this
gnarly spiral shape and so we can stuff
whole arrays of them into the same area
space in some cases as many as 32 these
antenna arrays can generate directional
beams aimed at the Tower or base station
and vice versa I am strangely reminded
of the eye of Sauron in that Lord of the
Rings movie and that was on a tower
too so that was transmitting to the
tower when the tower sends a response it
forms another beam towards the handset
then inside the handset it is pretty
much the process in first we receive and
isolate the transmission amplify it and
then use a mixer to pull out the analog
signal for converting back into digital
one of the big issues with millimeter
wave one most people are familiar with
is that the signal cannot easily
penetrate certain objects buildings
foliage and even the human body bricks
trees and outdoor tinted glass are
particularly good at attenuating
millimeter wave signals AT&T flag the
ladder has a major issue during their
trials on the other hand heavy rainfall
does not seem to be a significant factor
researchers conclude no major effect for
people within 200 M of a base
station even just facing away from the
base station can hurt performance a 2022
experiment done at a millimeter wave
deployment in Boston found 10 times
better down link and three times better
up link as compared to
LTE nice but if you only just turn your
back to the base station then you suffer
a drastic drop in both metrics so the
general rule of thumb is that millimeter
wave works best in extremely busy areas
with quotequote line of site Sports
Arenas malls
airports I suppose that I should mention
here the 5G conspiracy theories like the
link to covid I've seen plenty of
rhetoric and fear-mongering but little
credible scientific evidence that these
millimeter wave rollouts cause damaging
health issues I am no doctor but it
seems to me at worst the waves hit your
skin and imperceptibly warm it without
penetrating very deep I reckon the Sun's
UV rays a considerably more ubiquitous
and energetic electromagnetic wave do
significantly more
damage anyway so what does this
densification mean for the telecoms
previously with 1G through 4G telecoms
installed large macro cells with range
of several kilometers with millimet wave
they will need to install many small
cells in dense amounts perhaps as little
as 50 to 100 m apart acquiring this many
5G sites is a challenging timec
consuming task these sites have to have
power that is available 24/7 so to
provide Emergency Services as well as a
back hul connection to the larger
Network they also have to be
aesthetically inconspicuous because
nobody likes to look at a cell tower not
to mention the environmental permitting
and all that telecoms have considered
leveraging reflectors integrated into
Billboards or exterior glass to bounce
millimeter wave signals off of buildings
kind of like how sunlight reflects off
Windows to heat rate birds and cars it
sounds a bit crazy but that saves money
as opposed to acquiring another cell
site the deployment from LTE to 5G has
been complicated very complicated the
definition of 5G is any device using the
5G new radio standard and as I mentioned
the 5G new radio standard supports three
sets of 5G bands low mid and high the
low and mid bands are between 410 MHz
and 7.1 MHz this is more like 4G good
coverage but weaker capacity so they
particularly in the low bands are
basically not that much different than
4G
LTE the high band is where the
millimeter wave spectrum is and where
the most capacity and data rates are
promised however deploying it would be
the most work due to the propagation and
densification
challenges now telecoms can't just
abandon their expensive LTE networks so
they got two ways to deploy 5G
Standalone and non-standalone the
Standalone option is to build and deploy
a true 5G Network 5G base stations
attached to a 5G core Network and
connected to 5G new radio consumer
devices it is completely new the
non-standalone option is a middle ground
stepping stone between 4G LTE and stand
Standalone 5G there's a 5G new radio but
it connects to a 4G LTE core this gets
you somewhat faster speeds as well as an
LTE fallback but the Improvement isn't
great especially at lower bands the big
American telecoms Verizon and 18t were
the first to go into millimeter wave 5G
and it made sense for them the lowed
midband 5G frequencies were already
occupied by their legacy 3G and 4 G
networks so for those telecoms the high
bands were Green Field territory in 2018
Verizon started deploying non-standalone
5G for mobile and their fixed wireless
access service which is like internet
Broadband but delivered using a wireless
connection the fixed wireless access
stuff works well other companies like US
Cellular and T-Mobile offer it too but
it is a niche service the issue had to
do with the mobile service part of the
millimeter wave roll out by the time 5G
came around the smartphone ecosystem had
matured most customers were not super
willing to pay a big premium for some
faster rates and the super confusing
branding of what is or is not 5G did not
help much either lots of people had no
idea if they were connected to LTE the
LTE 5G Middle Ground the quote unquote
real 5G or the actually super fast
5G the biggest Hope was in late 2020
when Apple released the iPhone 12 in the
United States the US version of the
iPhone 12 had 5G millimet wave support
unfortunately that still did not much
change things analysts expected that
millimeter wave would carry about 5% of
mobile traffic in
2021 and Verizon said that over time 50%
of urban traffic will be on millimeter
wave but in 2021 the analytics Company
open signal reported that just about
2.9% of mobile traffic in US urban areas
was consumed on millimeter wave 5G a
miss another study of San Diego by ejl
Wireless research at the time hinted at
why they found that after connection any
slight movement would cause the phone to
fall back onto 4G LTE and they were
skeptical that Verizon could get a good
return on its investment if it tried to
cover a large city Verizon and Qualcomm
the latter a major backer of millimeter
wave argued that coverage added less
than how much data traffic is being
shifted to millimeter wave that would
alleviate pressure on the existing 3G
and 4G networks and thus be a net
positive sum for the telecoms
nevertheless Wall Street was not pleased
especially as the Insurgent third
Telecom T-Mobile came out with low and
midband 5G deployments and that went
well since then it seems like Verizon
and AT&T have tweaked their strategy in
February 2021 the two companies bought
licenses for 5G midband Spectrum in the
C ban 3.7 GHz a prime ban Verizon by
itself spent over $45 billion on this
spectrum since then the two companies
have focused on expanding their midband
offerings including their newer
Standalone 5G Network the real 5G
meanwhile device support especially on
the Apple front has been weird a few
years in it is still only the US iPhones
that support millimeter wave and their
iPads even recently drop support for it
entirely before we conclude I want to
thank PhD student t elazar for his help
in walking me through this complicated
ecosystem the video would not be
possible without him and any mistakes
are mine not his the telecoms are still
expanding out millimeter wave but mostly
for fixed wireless access in rural areas
and high density urban areas like
airports and sports stadiums and
honestly that is where a millimeter wave
works best unless something changes is
there a super compelling super broad
killer app for millimeter wave out there
many of the internet of things and
Industry 4.0 initiatives that 5G was
supposedly to be good for have not yet
emerged in the United States deployments
have not met expectations and so the FCC
has started looking at more quotequote
Creative Solutions to use this
millimeter wave spectrum which remains
largely unused outside of the US the
rest of the world hasn't really jumped
on on to millimeter wave one significant
exception being Japan which set up a
millimeter wave Network ahead of the
2020 Tokyo Olympics but technology
continues to evolve and telecoms
continue to move towards Standalone 5G
the true 5G bolstered by continuing
improvements done by Qualcomm and others
but will millimeter wave benefit from
that progression we shall see all right
everyone that's it for tonight thanks
for watching subscribe to the Channel
Sign up for the newsletter and I'll see
you guys next time